Sakana Al Technical Problem Set - Version 0.6.4

Instructions
Prospective technical candidates (such as yourself) who we believe have potential, are asked to
work through this problem set. While you are not strictly required to complete every problem, we
strongly encourage you to attempt all parts to have a realistic chance of moving forward. We
also expect different quality and different types of answers from candidates with different
backgrounds and levels of experience, from internship applicants to highly experienced
researchers from industry. The problems are constructed so that they can be approached with
the help of a good consumer-level GPU workstation capable of running deep learning stacks.
The problems are designed to also reflect the nature of Sakana Al, and we intend the exercise
to be fun and challenging! We will ask you to play with nature-inspired algorithms like neural
network morphology evolution. Then, we ask you to play with generative Al models such as
Stable Diffusion, but add a Japan twist! We ask you to work with recent bio-inspired neural
network architectures, and also attempt to work with agentic Al systems for LLM-guided
research, experimentation and discovery. We ask you to build a character-leve/ LM. In
attempting this problem set, most people should learn something new and interesting!
We ask that candidates submit their solutions in a single, self-contained Google Doc report
- you are free to include an Appendix Section (not on GitHub please) that includes code
snippets if they feel it is necessary for understanding your solutions. We aim to judge the
candidate's thought process, ability to interpret and follow instructions (and if our instructions are
vague, ability to demonstrate best judgment in coming up with reasonable assumptions, design
and engineering choices), skills outside of just ML development, and ability to communicate
clearly and convincingly from reading their submitted Google Doc report. Important: Assume
the reviewer will not read anything outside the contents of your Google Doc. Do not submit
your solutions in other formats (e.g. Notion, MS Word, GitHub, Colab.)
Note that it is fine, and even encouraged to use existing open-source code and incorporate it
into your solution. We even included many references to open-source implementations in the
Reference section of each part. We just ask that you do your best to reference work you used in
your solution. Please present your code in a way that makes it clear what was written by you.
We ask that you keep your coding standards at a high level (e.g. don't submit unreadable
spaghetti code for your solutions). Please include code that you believe proudly reflects your
accomplishments in an Appendix of the Google Doc. Make your code readable for mere
mortals, add comments when it makes sense, use a linter or equivalent-just make sure your
work is presentable, so we can also assess software engineering aspects of your skills.
Lastly, there is no strict time limit. A good rule-of-thumb is to submit your responses within a
month. From our own experience, it may take 1 or 2 weeks to complete all parts. Please email
us by replying to our email correspondence to share your completed Google Doc submission.


Part 5: LLM Agents
The Al Scientist: Towards Fully Automated Al Research
The Al Scientist's Tree Search Process for Producing a Research Paper

Nature Paper (Open-Access): https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-026-10265-5
Blog: https://sakana.ai/ai-scientist-nature
One of the grand challenges of Al is developing agents capable of conducting scientific
research and discovering new knowledge. While LLMs have already been used to aid human
scientists, e.g. for brainstorming ideas or writing code, they still require extensive manual
supervision or are heavily constrained to a specific task.
When we first introduced The Al Scientist (paper, blog, code) in August, 2024, we shared an
ambitious vision of an agent powered by foundation models capable of executing the entire
machine learning research lifecycle. From inventing ideas and writing code to executing
experiments and drafting the manuscript, the system demonstrated that end-to-end automation
of the scientific process is possible. Soon after, we shared a historic update in April, 2025: the
improved Al Scientist-v2 (paper, blog, code) produced the first fully Al-generated paper to pass
a rigorous human peer-review process.
In March, 2026, our paper, "Towards Fully Automated Al Research," describing all of this
work, along with fresh new insights, was published in Nature Journal. This Nature publication
consolidates these milestones and details the underlying foundation model orchestration. It also
introduces our Automated Reviewer, which matches human review judgments and actually
exceeds standard inter-human agreement.

Conceptual overview of The Al Scientist workflow, including coming up with research ideas,
implementing experiments, executing those experiments, writing the paper, and reviewing it.
Crucially, by using this reviewer to grade papers generated by different foundation models, we
discovered a clear scaling law of science. As the underlying foundation models improve, the
quality of the generated scientific papers increases correspondingly. This implies that as
compute costs decrease and model capabilities continue to exponentially increase, future
versions of The Al Scientist will be substantially more capable.

The quality of papers generated by The Al Scientist increases when using newer, more
intelligent foundation models, as judged by the Automated Reviewer.

In September, 2025, we have also released ShinkaEvolve (Blog Post, Paper, GitHub), an
open-source framework that evolves programs for scientific discovery with unprecedented
sample-efficiency. Like AlphaEvolve and its variants, our framework leverages LLMs to find
state-of-the-art solutions to complex problems, but using orders of magnitude fewer resources.

High-level overview of ShinkaEvolve. The ShinkaEvolve framework constructs an archive of
evaluated programs, generates new programs, and evaluates their fitness.
Optional: Study this Overview of ShinkaEvolve from the author: video, slides
The Exercise
Just like how the LLM Agentic tools we developed (Al Scientist-v1, Al Scientist-v2,
ShinkaEvolve) strive to pursue open-ended discovery, this exercise is also meant to be an
open-ended one. Your task is to first read and study our papers and GitHub repos for some of
the aforementioned tools we have released. We'd like you to build something you believe is
incredibly interesting with one of these tools, and let us know what you did in your report!
Note: Please don't simply run our Al Scientist (v1 or v2) code out-of-the-box, without any
meaningful contributions, to "generate a few Al papers" and submit that as your solutions, as
anyone can do that, and you will likely be rejected for doing something this simple.
Some example ideas and suggestions of directions we believe are worthy to pursue:
. Extend our tools to produce contributions in computational areas outside of ML. For
instance, have it innovate in Evolutionary Computation, perhaps creating better versionsof the NEAT algorithm described in Problem 1, better ES algorithms that beat CMA-ES,
or produce innovations in areas like Quality Diversity.
. Other interesting fields to extend and apply our tools to are in Artificial Life, where the
system can improve the interestingness of systems like Lenia, Game of Life, or NCA.
. Investigate and extend our tools to find novel applications or improvements to Al
algorithms outside of traditional deep learning, such as search (MCTS), control or
planning, routing, scheduling algorithms.
. Conduct scientific experiments on simulated computational environments, or simulated
environments using a physics engine, to explore fields outside of computer science.
Design and implement proof-of-concept applications of The Al Scientist to tackle
important challenges for the Japanese banking, defense and government sectors.
Adapt our Automated Reviewer, which is calibrated to review ML papers, to other
practical domains. You may need to identify or build custom document datasets.
These are just a few examples to illustrate the degree in which we expect our tools to be
extended for the purpose of this exercise. Given the popularity of these projects, please do
check whether your approach has been done by others already.
Unlike Parts 1, 2, 4 of this problem set, you may, should you choose to, publish your results of
Part 5 on GitHub (or other avenues) as your personal project. If you do so, please do not
mention or refer to the existence of Sakana Al's technical problem set. Also, if your idea builds
on other people's projects, please also properly cite other people's work in your own work. If you
create new "template" tasks for The Al Scientist-v1 to start iterating on, feel free to submit a PR
to the official repo (if you want to), and make a note of your contribution in your solutions.
We also realize that not everyone will have access to several foundation models APIs, and
some might have access to only open-models such as DeepSeek or Qwen, which is vastly less
expensive compared to other models. In our evaluation, we will take the models and constraints
used into account when judging the results, and will be assessing your work for other factors
such as technical soundness and creativity, rather than just the results.


https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-026-10265-5

https://sakana.ai/ai-scientist-nature/

Scientist
v1[
https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.06292

https://sakana.ai/ai-scientist/

https://github.com/SakanaAI/AI-Scientist
]

v2[
https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.08066

https://sakana.ai/ai-scientist-first-publication/

https://github.com/SakanaAI/AI-Scientist-v2
]

https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-026-10265-5

Shinka[
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-026-10265-5

https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.19349

https://github.com/SakanaAI/ShinkaEvolve
]

https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131

https://github.com/codelion/openevolve

https://twitter.com/SakanaAILabs/status/1989352976792846356

https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1YM4vME_egxJv-LINh_NNqHAwVMtDbmsTp-UUlv9NeZo/edit?usp=sharing

https://xtech.nikkei.com/atcl/nxt/column/18/02801/091000009/

